# WeatherData
The WeatherData repository was the final individual project in my Computer Programming II class that I took at Jacksonville State University. In that class we learned java as well as deepened our understanding of object-oriented programming. On a basic level this program allows the viewer to search a database of weather data and get information about what happened on that date as well as how many entries of that date the database contains. Within the context of that class, it served as a review of both using input files in java and the use of classes for storing data. With this background information out of the way, it is best to start with the input file.

The provided csv file is an example of how the input file is structured. WeatherDataFile.csv is a comma separated value file that contains four values separated by commas per line of the file. Each line is a date with three corresponding pieces of data about what happened on that date. Those three pieces of data are the low temperature, the high temperature, and the amount of precipitation that were recorded on that date. You may note that there are a large number of records in the file. This large amount of data is necessary to allow the file to both search effectively as well as provide a higher chance that any one date will show up in a search. This file will eventually be iterated over and used to create a long ArrayList of class objects containing this data.

The aforementioned class object is created in the Day.java file. The java class has a number of instance variables which are private so that the values can only be changed through the methods. The six instance variables are respectively Month, Day, Year, lowTemp, highTemp, and rainFall. Each of the six will store their namesake as an int for the parts of the date and as a double for the data about the date. While this is different from the five pieces of data mentioned above in the WeatherDataFile.csv, the date will be split into three different parts for the search function I will describe later. The first method of the function is the constructor, but it takes no arguments because we will use the setter methods that follow it to fill the object of the Day class. After the constructor, there are setter and getter methods for each instance variable of the class. The final method in the Day class is the toString() method. This method allows it to print in the exact same form as it appears in the csv file. This was useful for debugging when taking in the input as it could be easily compared to the csv to see if that portion of the program was working properly.

The ProjectTwoMain.java file begins by importing the necessary libraries. The first three libraries will be used to get the input file as well as take in input from the user. The final library will allow the program to use an ArrayList to convert the input file into objects of the Day class. The program takes no command line arguments to start. It begins by defining the WeatherDataFile.csv as a scanner that it can receive input from. It then creates the ArrayList to hold all the data from that csv file. It also creates a new scanner to accept arguments from the command line that we will use later. 

The program uses a while loop to iterate over the entirety of the input file. By using the while loop with inputFile.hasNextLine() as its exit condition, the program can accommodate as large or small of a collection of dates as necessary. Within said while loop, the program will create a new string called line to hold the current line of data separators and all. It then creates a new Day object called d. Since this object will never be used directly outside of this loop, the ambiguous variable name will not create an issue. The program then creates two new arrays. These will be used to pass the data in the line string into d. The program then uses the .split() method to separate the line into six different strings and places them into the array. Using "(/)|(\\,)" as the argument for .split() will split the line based on both /’s and ,’s. This prevents the program from having to split the data twice because it needs the month and day isolated from the year. The following for loop parses each string as a double. This is done for the sake of later calculations. The setter methods are then used to fill d with the data from the csv. The parts of the date are cast into ints to preserve memory space. d is then added to the ArrayList we created earlier. 

Once we have exited the while loop we will have an ArrayList full of Day objects that we can now search. The program creates two values called userDay and userMonth. These are given arbitrary values to get us into the while loop. This while loop presents a menu to the user that prompts them for a month and a day. It also gives them the value they must enter to exit the menu and program. The program replaces the arbitrary values of userDay and userMonth with the user’s input. It then creates some values that will be used for storing and computing the data from the dates. The lowestTemp and highestTemp are both set to values that will be overwritten soon. The rest are set to zero. 

An advanced for loop is used to iterate over the ArrayList of Days. It checks the day and month of each day in the collection against what the user entered. If the input matches, the program checks for new extreme temps using the two following if statements. It gets and then adds the low temp, high them, and rainfall to the going totals so that we can extrapolate the averages from them. We then add to a variable called dayCount. This variable keeps up with how many successes there are from each search. Once the full search has completed, each average is calculated. The first two averages are rounded to two decimal places using those three lines of code each. The rain fall is calculated out to four decimal points. 

The final portion of the program prints all the data collected by the above search to the console for the user. The loop the repeats and prompts the user for another date. Once the user enters 0 0 as their input, the loop will still execute one more time. It iterates over the list one last time and still prints the default data provided by the declarations on line 56 before exiting the loop. This could be improved upon so that the program wastes no time on one final iteration of the loop. Finally the program thanks the user for using it before exiting.
